Re-examined the psychiatry of Sigmund Freud. He questioned the conventional boundaries between the rational and irrational by suggesting
that the unconscious, rather than being primitive is just as complex and sophisticated in its structure as the conscious. He proposed that
the unconscious is structured like a language which allows a discourse between the unconscious and conscious and ensures that the unconscious plays a role in our experience of the world. 

Crisis of representation
Malleable reality 

We all seem to have an unspoken agreement to almost ignore this duality because to bring it to the forefront might be to shatter our reality

We are also trained to fear our intuition because of its impulsive nature. Yet, the area of the brain involved in intuition is not located
in the midbrain where our feelings originate but in the anterior frontomedian cortex. It is unnecessary to fear intuition as such. 	- tara 

Intuition definition:
The ability to understand something instinctively, without the need for conscious reasoning 

Abstract expressionism explored the irrational desires of the Freudian unconscious. With new technologies of the 21st century. 
Science exposed a deeper mental reality and proved that human behavior is the product of an endless stream of perceptions, feelings 
and thoughts, at both the conscious and unconscious levels. Even with new technologies that allow for a verifiable observation of the mind,
reality itself is still debated

As in Gestalt theory, the brain completes external imagery the eye cannot produce – all done at an unconscious level. If a central function of the unconscious is to fill in the blanks in order to construct a useful picture of reality, how does this affect our understanding of the world? “The new conscious” explores how human behavior is dually dictated by the conscious and unconscious mind. 
-	The new unconscious by Danielle Kalamaras

- The Abstract Unconscious in Painting by David Parker
what takes place in the studio and subsequent reflections on the activity and its outcomes appears to be deeply conected to a vital personal need to engage in some form of highly altered state of mind. 
what is becoming clear, as my experience and conscious understanding develops, is that both process and product appear to be driven by inner (perhaps unconscious) needs - needs that are essentially manifested through highly concentrated perceptual fantasies. In this sense the work appears to be, in practice, intensely introverted - perhaps even bordering on the autistic. 
The imagery does not carry a level of aesthetic meaning and value, a value rooted somewhere other than any associations that might be made with shared, externally validated, sources of recognition. 
drive the initial intention to physically create an image
never before has a painter had to navigate through such a diversity and multiplicity of images as those currently available to a globalised visual consciousness. 
effective ways of visualizing authentic expressions of the human condition.
such diverse imagery can be minipulated and reconfigured in order to reveal a potential meaning through deliberate quotation, parody or even absurdity or one can reject all such references and turn to some form of inner imagery generated through free-form processes and chance occurances. 
liberate imagination 
an inner landscape 
avoids drawing on the use of pre-existing visual models
an image would be compromised by its literal connection to a given historical and cultural index
the space of the painting is crucial - avoiding any conscious desire to close down the imagination too soon by tying the imagery to overly obvious figurative expressions. 
re-imagine such an aesthetic space
one that does not overtly embrace references to culturally validated sources and yet is capable of carrying meaning and value at an unconscious level.
implicit in this approach is the assumption that psychological life is structured around two modes of being, one conscious and the other unconscious.
What is unconscious is not directly available to the consciousness
Freudian and Jungian psychologies suggest that what we experience in consciousness is inflected with and shaped by the unconscious and that addressing the needs of unconscious life can be fundamental to aesthetic appreciation. 
image my way through the labyrinth of unconscious form production
life without meaning or context and these are slowly and painstakingly brought into consciousness and formed into a structural matrix 
reveal and integrate unconscious complexes with highly structured consious assimilations 
the compacted and fragmented space does not encourage the eye to settle in any one space or on any one form rather we are stimulated to move in, out and around the space in a trance-like, hypnotic state, akin to daydreaming - a suspension of ego perhaps as the dream image takes hold and draws us deeper into other worlds
capable of raising consciousness by integrating this with the unconscious and its archetypal foundations 
as an emperical and essentially plastic medium painting follows its own laws 
laws that provide imagination with a material basis in which to express what is, in effect, a state of constant "being" and "becoming" for the active psyche
critically embedded in the materially based activity of painting. what psychology provides for painting is a reflective mirror, one in which we can study, at adistance the movements of imagination as it works on and through the practice in relation to both the individual and the collective psyche. 
conscious and unconscious are concepts used in reflective thought in order to understand what moves and conditions our inner lives
conditions or states of mind functioning within the psychic structure as a whole
if consciousness consists of the mental contents that a given subject is able to grasp with a measure of reassurance regarding their temporal perceptual apparatus, i.e place immediate experience in relation to available models of reality, 
then the unconscious embraces all those mental contents that remain slippery uncertain multifaceted yet seem to be commanding vital and fundamental to an experiencing psyche.
we can deduce the existence of unconscious modalities from our ability to provide a consistent rational account of all that affects us intellectually and emotionally hence the need for symbolization and as Jung shows us the symbolic points to the as yet unclear and unknown
what we think and feel and the intensity of aesthetic engagement is proportional to the depth of its unconscious content and by implication its imaginative texture that which cannot be fixed in meaning and yet is capable of moving the viewer psychologically away from the temporal (human) present and towards the universal (divine) or archetypal constant. 
man's relationship to the world as cyclical rather than linear in perspective
constants that at a cosmic level take us out of human progressive time and into a supra-human or divine state of constant repetition.
creative imagination is essentially vital to discovering a deeper truth about the world.
very concrete manifestion of the imagination
all the messy, painful and disturbing aspects
iin the act of creation - imagination moves through many varieties of experience stimulated by the marks and colours of their organization. At their very best, such experiences promote deep psychological responses capable of raising consciousness by signaling, in Jungian terms, the archetypal core of being whih, having an unconscious source, contains profound significance in its long term impact on the subjective psyche.
no representational elements contained within it as intended subject matter
representational art derives its aesthetic from mans self confidence in relation to the objective world as percieved in nature.
abstract art signifies an inner insecurity in relation to the natural world and a desire to seek spiritual sustenance and transcendent states of being through the formalizing and configuring of another world - one of non-naturalistic and absolute purity. 
psychological security and insecurity in relation to an indifferent natural world
what happens in the world beyond the human, is in its indifference, deeply troubling unless mediated and mitigated by ritual acts of aesthetic transformation as seen within both art and religion. 
"It is only as an aesthetic phenomenon that existence and the world are eternally justified" - Nietzsche 1993, p.32
"the urge to abstraction is the outcome of a great inner unrest inspired in man by the phenomena of the outside world; in a religious respect it corresponds to a strongly transcendental tinge to all notions. We might describe this state as immense spiritual dread of space..." - Worringer, 1997, pg.15
Worringer suggests that rationalistic developments in consciousness "...pressed back this instinctive  this instinctive fear conditioned by man's feeling of being lost in the universe..."(ibid) 
and hence developed an art of optimism and empathy towards the natural and organic external world of three dimensional space.
the self same loss of confidence in the confusion of the external world, an alienation from the given and a retreat to the inner world of spiritual purity
the painter was effectively attempting to reanimate the archetypal core of being through the vehicle of a plastic medium, where what is presented visually provides a space in which to lose the self within the safe boundaries of such a ritual act of creation. 
the paradox is that an implied archetypal core - the ultimate spiritual reality - of this "internal necessity" can only be suggested and never actually known - the artwork being the messenger though perhaps now the actual message.
the fundamental move to abstraction is the desire to access and hence acknowledge the imaginal reality of depth experience and that this experience is essentially sacral in its meaning. 
it is sacral because the core experience of abstract art creates a state of being that effectively negates the sense of self as a separate and detached entity confronted by the enormity and confusion of a coldly objective material world. 
the world through abstraction becomes animated with meaning that transcends human understanding as such placing meaning in the eternal divine realm accessed through the "mirror" of aesthetic engagement in the materially based image. 
i experience the mystery of its hidden meaning in the same way that one might engage in a religious experience 
describe such a process as an intensely compulsive - perhaps even ultimately a devotional activity - one that seems to take over and guide me into states of experience that appear to transcend ordinary consciousness and access a numinous core. 
such states are deeply theraputic and transformative in their ability to provide access to imaginative realms that are essential and vital to the deepening of my whole life experience. 

abstact expressionism defintion:
characterised gestured brush strokes or mark-making
the impression of spontaneity
aim to make art that while abstract was also expressive or emotional in its effect. they were inspired by the surrealist idea that art should come from the unconscious mind and by the automatism of artist Joan Miro
action painters who attacked their canvases with expressive brush strokes and the color field painters who filled their canvases with a large area of a single colour

the action painters were led by jackson pollock and willem de kooning who worked in a spontaneous improvisatory manner often using large brushes to make sweeping gestural marks.
in this way action painters directly placed their inner impulses onto their canvas

'instead of making cathedrals out of Christ, man or life, we are making it out of ourselves, out of our own feelings. -Newman 

action painters:
1940's to 1960's whos approach to painting emphasised the physical act of painting as an essential part of the finished work

automatism definition:
in art, automatism refers to creating art without conscious thought, accessing material from the unconscious mind as part of the creative process
Automatism as a term is borrowed from physiology, where it describes bodily movements that are not consciously controlled like breathing or sleepwalking. 
Freud used free association and automatic drawing or writing to explore the unconscious mind of his patients
"pure psychic automatism...the dictation of thought in the absense of all control exercised by reason and outside all moral or aethetic concerns" - Andre Brenton, manifesto of surrealism 

brenton and others produced the earliest examples of automatism in their automatic writings, aiming to write as rapidly as possible without intervening consciously to guide the hand. 

others reportedly tapped into visionary or trance states 

